---
title: "CI pipeline template for Python in Gitlab"
date: 2022-04-03 19:59:00 -0000
categories: template
---
CI pipelines are great tools for ensuring your code is up to standards and making it easier for multiple developers to collaborate together. In a [previous article](./../../../../template/2022/03/12/intro-to-ci-pipelines.html) you can check out how to create a CI pipeline in Github. Gitlab, another place to keep your code, is frequently used by large businesses. Below you can find a template for a small linting + testing pipeline for Gitlab. 


## Template
There are two parts of the template - the YAML file and the requirements file. The YAML file describes the pipeline. The requirements file holds a list of all the packages you need to run the pipeline.

```yml
image: "python:3.9-slim

variables:
    test_db_password: "password"
    test_db_user: "user_name"

before_script:
    - python --version
    - pip install virtualenv
    - python -m venv .venv
    - source .venv/bin/activate
    - pip install wheel setuptools
    - pip install -r requirements.txt

stages:
    - lint_and_test

linting-job:
    stage: lint_and_test
    script:
        - pytest
        - flake8 src
        - echo $test_db_password
```

The requirements file can look like:
```txt
numpy
pandas==1.*
flake8
pytest
```

## The template in details
Name of the YAML file should be something like .gitlab-ci.yml. The requirements file expected from the template is requirements.txt, found at the root of the directory. 

### Image
It starts with a python Docker image. Here we have a slim one that is ~100mb. Depending on your needs it might be a good idea to choose a different image with different default packages installed. You can see a full list of those [here](https://hub.docker.com/_/python/).

### Variables
If you happen to create a test db or need to define any other variables, you can put them under a variables section. They are referred to with a $ sign before the variable name.

### before_script
The before script creates the environment we shall use for each of the jobs we execute. This particular template has only 1 stage, but if it had multiple ones we would execute the before script before every stage. 

### Stages
We start of with a declaration of the stages involved (just one in this case). To define the stage we must:
- name it
- under the script part define what happens in the stage. 

In the current set up there are three commands that get executed:
- a test with pytest - you will need a tests directory set up. You can see an example project [here](https://github.com/gratipine/ci_example). 
- a lint of the src folder with flake8
- an echo of a variable that was defined in the variables section. 

## Ending words
As you can see, the template is a simple affair.

By default this runs every time you push towards a branch that has a pull request open on it. Try to keep up the setup to a minimum - the fewer things the pipeline is installing, the faster you will know where you missed a comma and whether you broke any tests. 

## Sources
- [Gitlab CI documentation](https://docs.gitlab.com/ee/ci/)
- [Gitlab beginner's tutorial](https://about.gitlab.com/blog/2018/01/22/a-beginners-guide-to-continuous-integration/)
- [List of Python Docker images](https://hub.docker.com/_/python/)
- [Discussions on best Python Docker image](https://pythonspeed.com/articles/base-image-python-docker-images/)